---
title: Approaching Personal Finance
description:
  Many of my peers are at the age where they're going out into the world and making real money for the first time in
  their lives and some have been asking for my advice on how to best handle their personal finances. I've decided to lay
  out my approach in this post, with the goal of creating an overview for how to best maximize your financial health.
date: "2021-08-21"
published: false
tags:
  - finance
  - personal finance
---

_All numbers and figures like percentage yield, interest rate, benefits and others are given as examples derived from
time of writing._

One issue I had growing up in the Canadian education system was that personal finance was a subject I basically never
came across in formal education. From talking to my peers their experience was essentially the same, all our knowledge
leading up to entering the workforce came from apocryphal information from our parents or adults in our lives that was
often either incomplete like "never use a credit-card because it's a scheme to entrap you in debt" or outdated like
"keep an emergency fund in cash so when there's a run on the banks you can access your funds".

# Table of Contents

# Part I: Maximizing Your Finances

## Planning, Goal Setting

## Earn More

##

# Part II: Getting The Most Out Of Your Financial Products

Now that the abstract, long-term stuff is out of the way, another thing that many people can improve on is the kinds of
financial products you use. I see too many peers default to "Big Bank My Parents Used" for everything, from their
checking account to their investments.

The financial services world is very vibrant, with a wide variety of products on offer. For example, while traditional
banks are comfortably offering 0% interest "savings" accounts, the arrival of "Online Banks" which have little to no
physical presence are able to offer interest rates on deposit accounts far higher than traditional banks (Although the
current interest-rate environment isn't favorable, at the time of writing **~0.50%** seems common).

These products can be broken down essentially into three categories which represent the three places your money go:

- Spending
- Saving
- Investing

For each category I'll list the relevant financial services or products where I'll describe it, give some thoughts and
list some things to look for when deciding on an option.

For everything discussed, [Nerdwallet](https://www.nerdwallet.com/) is usually a good bet to find reviews on different
financial services. For example you can browse Nerdwallet to compare interest rates between savings accounts.

TODO: Image from Nerdwallet.

## Spending

### Spending Account

This is essentially an deposit account where you can freely deposit and withdraw money from, usually this is offered in
the form of a "Checking Account", but the reason I call this part the "Spending Account" is because there are
increasingly deposit account offerings that yield interest, give cash-back when you spend, or have other benefits. For
example, the M1 Finance Spending account lets you divert excess deposits towards your investments (Unfortunately
unavailable currently to visa holders like myself).

The idea with the Spending Account is that you can pay off your credit card, transfer money to other people or your
other accounts, all without incurring any fees and with few limits.

The amount you keep here is up to you, but I typically aim for **2 months worth of expenses**. But if I foresee any
larger expenses coming up I may keep a larger amount.

The kinds of features you should consider are its fees, minimum balance, transaction limits, branch and ATM
availability. Its generally a tradeoff between these and what you prioritize is up to you. Personally I went for a
no-fee, no minimum balance and no restriction account that doesn't have much in-person branch support.

Currently, there are many "Online Bank" offerings with zero fees and some even throw in some interest (**0.30% -
1.00%**). Some financial technology companies like M1 and Robinhood have spending account options attached to their
investment accounts which lets you earn interest on uninvested cash.

### Credit

To start with, its generally a terrible idea to pay interest on luxury items and other expenses that don't hold their
value or depreciate over time. But, there are still good ways to effectively benefit from spending on things on credit,
with the intent to pay little to no interest. Like we discussed earlier about the "time-value of money", it can actually
be a good idea to accept financing offers with promotional low or no interest rates because you can benefit from keeping
more of your money now, and spreading out the impact of the expense.

In general a true **0%** interest rate with no strings attached can be a great deal, although very rare, sometimes you
can find this when financing expensive luxury goods like Peloton through lending services like Affirm, typically the
actual interest paid to the lender is subsidized in order to get a 0% rate and entice more business. Some Credit Cards
may also have promotional zero-interest periods.

An interest rate at or below inflation (The Federal Reserve aims for **~2%** annually) can be very good way to get more
time-value out of your money, typically you'll find these with secured lending options, like buying securities on margin
(InteractiveBrokers offers **~1%** currently), where your existing investments are used as collateral.

The "prime rate" (Currently **2.45%** for Canada, **3.25%** in US) is used by banks for lending to customers with
excellent credit, typically for Mortgage loans. In our current low interest-rate environment, this can be an excellent
deal for real-estate investing, although getting a loan at or near the prime rate usually requires great credit.

The typical credit card rate (**12% - 30%**) looks pretty terrible compared to the above

By utilizing your credit, you can improve your credit score and get better credit offerings in the future, for example a
more exclusive credit card or lower interest rate on a loan or mortgage. Credit Scores are a bit of a grey-box, while
some of their components are known (credit utilization, age of credit, etc) the computed result can be a bit difficult
to retrieve. In fact, having your credit report generated can actually decrease your credit score ðŸ¤”. A great way to
keep track of your credit score without a hard credit pull is through [Credit Karma](https://www.creditkarma.com/),
which is available in the US and Canada.

#### Credit Cards

**Credit Card rewards are subsidized by those purchasing goods with "lower-tier" Credit Cards, and especially those
paying in cash.**

##### Churning

## Saving

### High Yield Savings Accounts

### Liquid Investments

## Investing

### Tax Advantaged Accounts

### Brokerage Accounts

### Real Estate
